Acting on advice from the nation's top infectious diseases expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci, and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Biden administration will restrict travel from South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho, Eswatini, Mozambique and Malawi.

The decision to restrict travel comes as the federal government is still attempting to learn more about the new variant, named Omicron. They need to see more sequencing, but after discussing what they've seen so far, officials decided to halt travel from these other countries out of concern about what they don't yet know.
Biden was briefed Friday on the new coronavirus variant circulating in southern Africa, he said in the announcement.

A senior Biden administration official said several steps have to be taken before the restrictions begin on Monday, including a formal US proclamation, Transportation Security Administration directives and coordination with airlines.

"This is a quick timeline but there are things that need to be done beforehand," the official said.
An airline source told CNN airline executives and the White House were in touch Friday, prior to the announcement of new travel restrictions.

Another source familiar with the situation said there was a call Friday afternoon with the federal government and the airline industry. The federal government is working on drafting an official directive that will include guidelines for airlines that go into effect just after midnight Monday morning.
South Africa's health minister announced Thursday the discovery of the variant, which appears to be spreading rapidly in parts of the country.

Currently, "there's no indication" that the new variant is in the United States right now -- and US scientists are working closely with colleagues in South Africa to learn more about the emerging variant, Fauci, Biden's chief medical adviser and the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told CNN's Brianna Keilar before the travel restrictions were announced Friday.
"Right now, we're getting the material together with our South African colleagues to get a situation where you could actually directly test it. So, right now you're talking about sort of like a red flag that this might be an issue -- but we don't know," he said.

"You want to find out if in fact it does evade the vaccines that we're doing," Fauci said when asked about potential travel restrictions. "You're prepared to do everything you need to do to protect the American public, but you want to make sure there's a basis for doing that."

Several other countries -- including the United Kingdom -- have banned flights from South Africa and surrounding African countries in response to the emergence of the variant.

The travel restrictions do not apply to American citizens and lawful permanent residents. As with all international travelers, they must still test negative prior to travel.

